Agg builder blog post (#2)
alcaeus/mongo-php-library: tests/AggregationBlogPost/article.md

# Better Aggregation Pipeline Support in the MongoDB PHP Driver

The aggregation framework is a powerful tool in your MongoDB toolbox. It allows
you to run complex queries on your data, shaping and modifying documents to suit
your needs. This power comes through a lot of different pipeline stages and
operators, which comes with a certain learning challenge. MongoDB Compass comes

> with an aggregation pipeline builder that allows you to see results in real-time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operators, which in turn brings a certain learning challenge. MongoDB Compass
includes an aggregation pipeline builder that allows you to see results in real-time
```

Removing repetition of "comes".

for each stage and fix mistakes early on. Once your pipeline is complete, you
can export the pipeline to your language and use it in your code. In the PHP
driver, from now on your pipeline lives as an array, completely untyped, and
sometimes a relatively complex structure of stages and operators. As an example,

> let's take this pipeline from one of my projects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
driver, that pipeline would live on as an array, completely untyped, and
sometimes with a relatively complex structure of stages and operators. Let's
take this pipeline from one of my projects as an example:
```

            'prices' => [
                '$push' => [
                    'k' => '$_id.fuelType',
                    'v' => [
                        'lowest' => '$lowest',
                        'highest' => '$highest',
                        'average' => '$average',
                        'span' => ['$subtract' => ['$highest', '$lowest']],
                    ],
                ],
            ],
        ],
    ],
    ['$addFields' => ['prices' => ['$arrayToObject' => '$prices']]],
    [
        '$group' => [
            '_id' => [
                'year' => '$_id.year',
                'month' => '$_id.month',
            ],
            'brands' => [
                '$push' => [
                    'brand' => '$_id.brand',
                    'count' => '$count',
                    'prices' => '$prices',
                ],
            ],
        ],
    ],
    [
        '$addFields' => [
            'brands' => [
                '$sortArray' => [
                    'input' => '$brands',
                    'sortBy' => ['count' => -1],
                ],
            ],
        ],
    ],
    ['$sort' => ['_id.year' => 1, '_id.month' => 1]],
];
```

> Phew, that's a lot of logic. To better understand what this pipeline does, let's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's a lot of logic! To better understand what this pipeline does, let's
```

"Phew" works in speech, but I think an exclamation point better communicates emotion in written form.

look at a single source document:

```json
{
  "reportDate": "2024-10-22T13:15:03+02:00",
  "station": {
    "brand": "Acme Corp."
  },
  "fuelType": "diesel",
  "price": "1.759"
}
```

I've left out some fields that we're not using right now. The aggregation

> pipeline aggregates all of these documents, producing a document for each day:

Reviewer: The `_id` below includes a year and month, so wouldn't this be one document per month? The pipeline above also only seems to group by months.

Author: Indeed, that's correct.
```suggestion
pipeline aggregates all of these documents, producing a document for each month:
```

```json
{
  "_id": {
    "year": 2024,
    "month": 10
  },
  "brands": [
    {
      "brand": "Acme Corp.",
      "count": 1,
      "prices": {
        "diesel": {
          "lowest": 1.759,
          "highest": 1.759,
          "average": 1.579,
          "span": 0
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Without going into more details on this, even if we were to comment on parts of
the aggregation pipeline to explain what it does, there will still be a high
cognitive load when going through the aggregation pipeline. One reason for this
is that any PHP editor will not know that this is an aggregation pipeline, and
thus can't provide any better syntax highlighting other than "this is a string

> in an array". Couple that with a few levels of nesting, and you've got yourself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thus can't provide much help beyond syntax highlighting (e.g. "this is a string
in an array"). Couple that with a few levels of nesting, and you've got yourself
```

This may read better. There may be a better word for "help", but it's still clear as-is.

> this magical kind of code that you can write, but not read. We can of course

Reviewer: Try to find a way to incorporate [domain-specific language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-specific_language) into this paragraph. Maybe it can replace "magical kind of code"?

I think the point you're making is that the status quo allows you to express the aggregation framework DSL using untyped arrays, which don't help with readability down the line (especially if they were exported from something like Compass).

Author: Reworded the paragraph in addition to the other suggestion.

refactor this code, but before we get into that, we want to move away from these
array structures.

## Introducing the Aggregation Pipeline Builder

> Previously released as a standalone package, version 1.21 of the MongoDB Driver

Reviewer: Was the standalone package ever formally announced? Grammatically, "Previously released as a standalone package" doesn't read well as the clause could be interpreted as applying to the driver itself. The alternative would be:

> ...driver now includes a comprehensive aggregation pipeline builder, which was previously released as a standalone package.

I understand that doesn't flow quite the same. If you'd still like to mention that it was a previous project, consider:

> Previously released as a standalone package, a comprehensive aggregation pipeline builder is now included in version 1.21 of the MongoDB PHP driver.

You could also say "included by default" if it was previously a package suggestion (I don't recall offhand).

for PHP now comes with a fully grown aggregation pipeline builder. Instead of

> writing complex arrays, you now get factory methods to generate pipeline stages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously released as a standalone package, version 1.21 of the MongoDB PHP
driver now includes a comprehensive aggregation pipeline builder. Instead of
writing complex arrays, you can use factory methods to generate pipeline stages
```

Using more active language with "now get" -> "can use".

and operators. Here is that same pipeline as we had before, this time written
with the aggregation pipeline builder:

```php

> $pipeline = new Pipeline(

Reviewer: Should this code example include `use` statements? I wouldn't advocate for it in each code block, but this is the first where you introduce the builder syntax. It would also communicate that things like `object()` are an internal function provided by the library.

Author: Good point. I added use statements for this example.

                    average: Expression::fieldPath('average'),
                    range: Expression::subtract(
                        Expression::doubleFieldPath('highest'),
                        Expression::doubleFieldPath('lowest'),
                    ),
                )
            )
        )
    ),
    Stage::addFields(
        prices: Expression::arrayToObject(
            Expression::arrayFieldPath('prices'),
        ),
    ),
    Stage::group(
        _id: object(
            year: Expression::fieldPath('_id.year'),
            month: Expression::fieldPath('_id.month'),
        ),
        brands: Accumulator::push(
            object(
                brand: Expression::fieldPath('_id.brand'),
                count: Expression::fieldPath('count'),
                prices: Expression::fieldPath('prices'),
            ),
        ),
    ),
    Stage::addFields(
        brands: Expression::sortArray(
            input: Expression::arrayFieldPath('brands'),
            sortBy: ['count' => -1],
        ),
    ),
);
```

Ok, this is still a complex pipeline, and we'll be working on this, but it now
becomes significantly easier to look at and differentiate operators from field

> names, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is still a complex pipeline, but compared to the original array example
it is now much easier to infer the context of each pipeline component. Operators
are clearly differentiated from field names, and this typing can enable code
editors and tooling to better assist the developer.
```

I removed "we'll be working on this", since I thought it distracted from the main point you're trying to make. You could always add a final sentence to this paragraph like, "Later, we'll refactor this a bit to make the code even more concise and readable."

To run an aggregation pipeline, you can pass a `Pipeline` instance to any method
that can receive an aggregation pipeline, such as `Collection::aggregate` or
`Collection::watch`. In addition, methods like `Collection::updateMany` and
`Collection::findOneAndUpdate` can receive a `Pipeline` instance to run an
update. Keep in mind that you won't be able to use all available aggregation

> pipeline stages in update operations.

Reviewer: Should you note that the builder doesn't enforce this, since it doesn't know about the context in which its output will be utilized?

Not sure if that was ever considered. I just recall there being a difference in using the query builder (e.g. `$match` syntax) vs. pipeline builder.

----

On that note, is the builder for `$match` usable to create regular query filters (e.g. `find`)?

Edit: Just saw the "Bonus Feature: Query Objects" section. That answers the last question.

Author: Added a sentence to clarify this.

### Builder Design

The builder was designed with ease of use in mind. Most importantly, we wanted
to represent the somewhat flexible type system and give better guidance to users
when writing aggregation pipelines. That's why you will see expressions like
`dateFieldPath`, `doubleFieldPath`, or `arrayFieldPath`. Each expression
resolves to a certain type when it's evaluated. For example, we know that the
`$year` operator expression resolves to an integer. The argument is an

> expression that resolves to a date, timestamp, or ObjectId. While we could use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`$year` operator expression resolves to an integer, and its argument is an
expression that resolves to a date, timestamp, or ObjectId. While we could use
```

Combining these two sentences for clarity.

> `$reportDate` to use the `reportDate` field from the document being evaluated,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`$reportDate` to reference the `reportDate` field of the document being evaluated,
```

`dateFieldPath` is more expressive and shows intent of receiving a date field.
This also allows IDEs like PhpStorm to make better suggestions when offering

> code completion.

Reviewer: would you also mention an assist for type checking? Presumably, this would help users catch type errors earlier (either by PHP itself or third-party tooling).

Author: Good poing 👍

For all expressions, there are factory classes with methods to create the
expression objects. The use of static methods makes the code a little more
verbose, but using functions was impossible due to aggregation pipeline using
operator names that are reserved keywords in PHP (such as `and`, `if`, and
`switch`). I'll show alternatives to using these static methods later in this

> blog post.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
verbose, but using functions was impossible due to conflicts between aggregation
operator names and reserved keywords in PHP (e.g. `and`, `if`, `switch`). I'll
show alternatives to using these static methods later in this blog post.
```

Defer to you if this reads better.

Author: Making a note for myself to come back to the alternatives to the static methods, this is currently not included in the blog post yet.

## Bonus Feature: Query Objects

As a side effect of building the aggregation pipeline builder, there's now also

> a builder for query objects. This is because the `$match` stage takes a query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a builder for query filters. This is because the `$match` stage takes a query
```

The section title can remain as-is, since these are literally Query objects, but would it make sense to refer to these as query filters? I think that's the terminology in both the server and driver docs.

object, and to avoid falling back to query arrays like you would pass them to
`Collection::find`, we also built a builder for query objects. Here you see an
example of a `find` call, along with the same query specified using the builder:

```php
$collection->find(['score' => ['$gt' => 70, '$lt' => 90]]);

$collection->find(
    Query::query(
        score: [
            Query::gt(70),
            Query::lt(90),
        ],
    ),
);
```

While this is a little more verbose, it provides a more expressive API than PHP

> array structures do. It's up to you to decide which option you like better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
array structures and brings the same improvements for IDEs and tooling. It's
up to you to decide which option you like better.
```

## Refactoring For Better Maintainability

### Extract Fields to Variables

With the basic builder details explained, there's still one problem: the builder
helps you write a pipeline, but it doesn't really make existing pipelines more
maintainable. Yes, it makes them easier to read, but a complex pipeline will
remain just as complex. So, let's discuss some refactorings we can make to make
the aggregation pipeline easier to read, but also to make parts of the pipeline
reusable. Note that all of these example apply the same way to pipelines written

> as PHP arrays, but I'll use the aggregation builder in the example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
remain just as complex. So, let's discuss some refactorings we can make to both
improve the pipeline's readability and make parts of the pipeline more reusable.
Note that although the following example uses the aggregation builder, the same
suggestions can also be applied to pipelines written as PHP arrays.
```

Let's look at the first `$group` stage in the original example:

```php
Stage::group(
    _id: object(
        year: Expression::year(Expression::dateFieldPath('reportDate')),
        month: Expression::month(Expression::dateFieldPath('reportDate')),
        fuelType: Expression::fieldPath('fuelType'),
        brand: Expression::fieldPath('station.brand'),
    ),
    lowest: Accumulator::min(Expression::doubleFieldPath('price')),
    highest: Accumulator::max(Expression::doubleFieldPath('price')),
    average: Accumulator::avg(Expression::doubleFieldPath('price')),
    count: Accumulator::sum(1),
);
```

As you can see, we use the `reportDate` and `price` fields multiple times. An

> obvious refactoring would be to extract a variable for this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, we reference the `reportDate` and `price` fields multiple times.
A quick refactoring would be to extract those to variables:
```

"Obvious" may have a negative connotation for an uninformed reader. That's also why style guides suggest avoiding language like "easy" or "simple" in the docs. "Quick" or "straightforward" is more gentle, though.

Author: Good point. I tried avoid using simply or something like that, but didn't consider "obvious". "Quick" indeed sounds a lot better 👍

```php
$reportDate = Expression::dateFieldPath('reportDate');
$price = Expression::doubleFieldPath('price');

Stage::group(
    _id: object(
        year: Expression::year($reportDate),
        month: Expression::month($reportDate),
        fuelType: Expression::fieldPath('fuelType'),
        brand: Expression::fieldPath('station.brand'),
    ),
    lowest: Accumulator::min($price),
    highest: Accumulator::max($price),
    average: Accumulator::avg($price),
    count: Accumulator::sum(1),
);
```

The `fuelType` and `station.brand` fields could be extracted as well. Since
these are only used once, I didn't do that, but you may want to do so to favour

> consistency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `fuelType` and `station.brand` fields could be extracted as well. I opted not
to since they are only used once, but you may want to do so in favor of consistency.
```

Defer to you if that reads better. You can preserve the British spelling if you like (especially if it's used elsewhere in the blog post).

### Comments Or Methods

In complex pipelines, you'll often find comments explaining what a certain
pipeline stage or segment does. You should definitely include comments like
that, but you can also consider extracting parts of a pipeline to your own
builder method. If you choose a descriptive method name, this can already
explain what the stage or segment does, without the reader having to see the

> internal workings.

Reviewer: I think the advice you're trying to convey here is that self-documenting code is better than comments alongside code. Adding "self-documenting code" to this paragraph might be a bit much, though. Consider something like:

> Choosing a descriptive method name that explains what the stage or segment does can also remove the need for a comment and spare the reader from having to dive into the internal workings.

My goal here was to remove some of the commas in the original sentence, and note that self-documenting code and fill in for comments.

```php
public static function groupAndComputeStatistics(
    stdClass $_id,
    Expression\ResolvesToDouble $price,
): GroupStage {
    return Stage::group(
        _id: $_id,
        lowest: Accumulator::min($price),
        highest: Accumulator::max($price),
        average: Accumulator::avg($price),
        count: Accumulator::sum(1),
    );
}
```

When extracting logic, consider if the method can be reused elsewhere. In this
case, by keeping the `_id` field for the `$group` stage along with the price

> field as a parameter, we can reuse this builder method in a different pipeline. 

Reviewer: In the interest of self-documenting code, you could consider renaming the `$_id` parameter to `$groupBy`. But I think most users of the aggregation framework would know what `_id` is in this context so probably not necessary.

Author: Yes, but this is an excellent point. While users of the aggregation framework would know that `_id` is used for grouping, I still consider `groupBy` a better name for the extracted method. I've updated the sample code 👍

```php
$reportDate = Expression::dateFieldPath('reportDate');
$price = Expression::doubleFieldPath('price');

self::groupAndComputeStatistics(
    _id: object(
        year: Expression::year($reportDate),
        month: Expression::month($reportDate),
        fuelType: Expression::fieldPath('fuelType'),
        brand: Expression::fieldPath('station.brand'),
    ),
    price: $price,
);
```

### Extract multiple stages

We've now refactored the first pipeline stage, but the `$group` stage below is
also relatively complex to read. To make matters worse, this pipeline stage
works together with the `$addFields` stage below: `$group` assembles a list of
fuel types with their prices, which is then converted to an object in
`$addFields`. Ideally, we want to hide this implementation detail and extract
both stages together.

> To do so, we once again extract a factory method, except that this time we'll be
> returning a `Pipeline` instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, we once again extract a factory method, except that this time we'll
return a `Pipeline` instance:
```

```php
public static function groupAndAssembleFuelTypePriceObject(
    stdClass $_id,
    Expression\ResolvesToString $fuelType,
    Expression\ResolvesToInt $count,
    Expression\ResolvesToDouble $lowest,
    Expression\ResolvesToDouble $highest,
    Expression\ResolvesToDouble $average,
): Pipeline {
    return new Pipeline(
        Stage::group(
            _id: $_id,
            count: Accumulator::sum($count),
            prices: Accumulator::push(
                object(
                    k: $fuelType,
                    v: object(
                        lowest: $lowest,
                        highest: $highest,
                        average: $average,
                        range: Expression::subtract(
                            $highest,
                            $lowest,
                        ),
                    )
                )
            )
        ),
        Stage::addFields(

>             prices: Expression::arrayToObject(

Reviewer: While trying to make sense of this, I had to read the `$arrayToObject` docs. Is it just me or does the [Behavior](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/operator/aggregation/arrayToObject/#behavior) section make no sense? It lists three different variations by server version and they all seem identical.

Author: Yeah, I agree that it's confusing, but I assume that MongoDB 3.4 before 3.4.19, 3.6 before 3.6.10, and 4.0 before 4.0.5 had this unpredictable behaviour. Why they chose to explain this in this convoluted way, I'm not sure 🤷‍♂️

Reviewer: Ah, it makes more sense re-reading it now. Something was definitely backported. I agree it's just convoluted, but does seem to cover all of the bases for each minor version series.

                Expression::arrayFieldPath('prices'),
            ),
        ),
    );
}
```

> By once again keeping fields as parameters, we keep the method flexible and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By once again keeping fields as parameters, the method remains flexible and we
```

Optional rewording to avoid repetition of "keep".

            fuelType: Expression::fieldPath('fuelType'),
            brand: Expression::fieldPath('station.brand'),
        ),
        price: $price,
    ),
    self::groupAndAssembleFuelTypePriceObject(
        _id: object(
            year: Expression::fieldPath('_id.year'),
            month: Expression::fieldPath('_id.month'),
            brand: Expression::fieldPath('_id.brand'),
        ),
        fuelType: Expression::fieldPath('_id.fuelType'),
        count: Expression::intFieldPath('count'),
        lowest: Expression::fieldPath('lowest'),
        highest: Expression::fieldPath('highest'),
        average: Expression::fieldPath('average'),
    ),
    self::groupBrandsAndSort(
        _id: object(
            year: Expression::fieldPath('_id.year'),
            month: Expression::fieldPath('_id.month'),
        ),
        brand: Expression::fieldPath('_id.brand'),
        count: Expression::fieldPath('count'),
        prices: Expression::fieldPath('prices'),
    ),
);
```

### Extract Complex Expressions

So far, we've only extracted entire pipeline stages that contain relatively
simple expressions. Sometimes your aggregation pipeline will contain a more

> complex expression. From the same project that I took the previous example from,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
complex expression. From the same project that yielded the previous example,
```

                                [
                                    '$add' => [
                                        [
                                            '$multiply' => [
                                                ['$hour' => '$$priceReport.reportDate'],
                                                3600,
                                            ],
                                        ],
                                        [
                                            '$multiply' => [
                                                ['$minute' => '$$priceReport.reportDate'],
                                                60,
                                            ],
                                        ],
                                        ['$second' => '$$priceReport.reportDate'],
                                    ],
                                ],
                            ],
                        ],
                        'price' => '$$priceReport.previous.price',
                    ],
                ],
            ],
            'lastPrice' => ['$last' => '$prices'],
        ],
    ],
];
```

> Once again, the builder can make this a little more concise, but the complexity
> remains:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The builder can make this a little more concise, but the complexity remains:
```

Many of the interstitial paragraphs use "once again" or similar language. This is so short that I don't think it'd needed.

                price: Expression::variable('priceReport.previous.price'),
            ),
            as: 'priceReport',
        ),
        lastPrice: Expression::last($prices),
    ),
);
```

The main cognitive effort comes from computing the `duration` field. So, this
should be our focus. Together with some comments, we can extract the logic to
separate builder methods:

```php
public static function computeElapsedSecondsOnDay(
    Expression\ResolvesToDate $date,
): Expression\ResolvesToInt {
    return Expression::add(
        Expression::multiply(
            Expression::hour($date),
            3600,
        ),
        Expression::multiply(
            Expression::minute($date),
            60,
        ),
        Expression::second($date),
    );
}

/**
 * Returns the time that has elapsed between two dates, in seconds.
 *
 * If the dates are on the same day, the difference is computed between the
 * two times. If the dates fall on different dates, the duration returned is
 * the number of seconds since the start of the day from the second date
 * argument.
 */
public static function computeDurationBetweenDates(
    Expression\ResolvesToDate $previousReportDate,

>     Expression\ResolvesToDate $reportDate,

Reviewer: Would `$fromDate` and `$toDate` be more descriptive? Or even just `$from` and `$to`? I don't think this method cares about a report at all, just as `computeElapsedSecondsOnDay()` above didn't.

Author: Yes, absolutely. I've named the parameters `$startDate` and `$endDate` for consistency with the parameter names for the `$dateDiff` expression.

): Expression\ResolvesToInt {
    return Expression::min(
        Expression::dateDiff(
            startDate: $previousReportDate,
            endDate: $reportDate,
            unit: 'second',
        ),
        self::computeElapsedSecondsOnDay($reportDate),
    );
}
```

> Again, this reduces the complexity of the pipeline stage tremendously:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This reduces the complexity of the pipeline stage tremendously:
```

Removing more filler words. Fine in a conference talk, but I don't think they're needed in a blog post.

parts into separate methods, you can test those in isolation under controlled
conditions, knowing that they behave as you intended. Looking at the last
example where we've extracted the expression that computes the duration between
two dates, you can now easily verify that all the individual parts of that
complex expression work as expected.

Just beware of premature abstractions: extract complex logic with the goal of
making your code more readable and testable, not to be able to reuse it across
your entire code base.

## Builder Internals

In the examples you've seen so far, we've only ever looked at stages,
expressions, and of course the `Pipeline` objects. But how do we end up with an
aggregation pipeline that the server understands? The objects created with the
various factory methods are value holder objects. They don't contain any logic,
but they allow us to know what types an expression will resolve to.

For an example, let's take the `$hour` operator. When you use
`Expression::hour`, you will receive an instance of an `HourOperator` class.
This class implements an `OperatorInterface`, telling the builder that this is

> an operator that can be used in aggregation pipeline. It also implements a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an operator that can be used in an aggregation pipeline. It also implements a
```

Technically, would an operator be used within a pipeline _stage_?

Pipelines have 1+ stages, and stages have some expressions and operators.

`ResolvesToInt` interface, as we always know that evaluating the expression
results in an integer value. The required `date` parameter of the operator is a
date, which in the builder is one of many things. It could be a BSON

> `UTCDateTime` instance, but it could also be the result of any operator that

Reviewer: Rather than say "BSON `UTCDateTime`, would it be more clear to say "`MongoDB\BSON\UTCDateTime` instance"?

Author: Updated, along with the previous suggestion.

returns a date, e.g. `$dateFromString`.

Now that we know about these value holder objects, we still need to make sure
the server knows what we're talking about. When you call `Collection::aggregate`
with the pipeline you built, what happens internally to it? Here, a series of

> encoders springs into action. We use a single entry point, the `BuilderEncoder`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
encoders spring into action. We use a single entry point, the `BuilderEncoder`
```

Subject/verb agreement.

class. This class contains multiple encoders that are able to handle all
pipeline stages, operators, and accumulators and transform them into their BSON
representations.

This allows us to keep the logic customizable. For example, the Doctrine MongoDB
ODM allows users to specify different names for fields in the database. In turn,
it needs to convert the name of a property in the mapped class to the name of

> the field in the database. Such a feature could easily be built by creating a

Reviewer: I'll defer to you if "easily" makes sense here. I imagine it wouldn't be for someone that isn't an ODM contributor.

Author: Excellent point. I used this opportunity and removed the other occurrences of "easily" as well.

custom encoder for all `fieldPath` expressions, and changing the field path
accordingly.

When creating a `MongoDB\Client` instance, you can now pass an additional
`builderEncoder` option in the `$driverOptions` argument. This specifies the
encoder used to encode aggregation pipelines, but also query objects. All

> `Database` and `Client` instances inherit this value from the client, but you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Database` and `Collection` instances inherit this value from the client, but you
```

> can override it through the options when fetching such an instance. This allows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can override it through the options when selecting those objects. This allows
```

Same meaning as "fetch" but it matches one of the existing method names.

you to have your custom logic applied whenever pipelines or queries are encoded
for the server.

With factories, value holders, and encoders, we wanted to ensure that creating
the builder does not turn into a repetitive chore. As you can imagine, many
operators will mostly consist of the same logic, resulting in tons of code

> duplication. To make matters worse, every new server version adds some new
> operators or even stages, so we wanted to make sure that we can easily expand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
duplication. To make matters worse, every new server version may introduce new
operators and stages, so we wanted to make sure that we can easily expand
```

the builder.

> We could try to rely on generative AI to help us with this, but this only goes

Reviewer: Please tell me "generative AI" here was intended as an SEO play for the blog post. Did we, at any point, actually consider using it for this project? IIRC, it was always defining the aggregation syntax in YAML and employing code generation.

Author: Yes and no. I may or may not have used GitHub CoPilot to protect my sanity in [one](https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/pull/2514) [or](https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/pull/2513) [more](https://github.com/doctrine/mongodb-odm/pull/2517) larger pull requests introducing aggregation builder functionality in the Doctrine ODM recently.

SEO is a nice benefit that I'll happily take.

so far. Instead, we leverage code generation to make the task easier. All
factories, value holders, and encoders are generated from a configuration. When
a new operator is introduced, we create a config file with all of its details:
input types, what the operator resolves to, documentation for parameters, and

> even the examples from the documentation are included. We then run the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
even examples from the MongoDB documentation. We then run the
```

This part of the sentence is a list (following "details:") noting what's included, so "are included" seemed redundant.

generator, and are given all code necessary to use the operator.

As if that wasn't good enough, the generator also takes the examples we added
before and adds them to the tests. In these tests, we manually write the builder
code that would generate the pipeline or expression from the example. This
ensures that the generated logic behaves as we expect, is protected from
regression should we make any changes to the generator, and it allows us to use
the builder and feel what it's like. To top it all off, we could add this code
to the server documentation, similar to how we add other language-specific code
snippets. We're not quite there yet, but we'd love to include this in the

> documentation.

Reviewer: > Ultimately, we love to add this builder code to the server documentation, similar to how we add other language-specific code snippets, but we're not quite there yet.

See if that reads better. I don't think this idea warrants more than a single sentence.

Author: Yep, much better 👍

Without going into more details on this, even if we were to comment on parts of
the aggregation pipeline to explain what it does, there will still be a high
cognitive load when going through the aggregation pipeline. One reason for this
is that the only way to express the aggregation framework domain-specific

> language (DSL) is through untyped arrays, and any PHP editor can't provide much

Reviewer: ```suggestion
language (DSL) is through untyped arrays, for which a PHP editor provides little
```

See if that reads better.

help beyond syntax highlighting. Pair that with a few levels of nesting, and
you've got yourself the kind of code that you can write, but not read. We could
start off by refactoring the code, but instead let's try to move away from array

> structures and use a better solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
structures and towards a better solution.
```

"Towards" balances "move away" nicely.

the builder and feel what it's like. Ultimately, we love to add this builder
code to the server documentation, similar to how we add other language-specific
code snippets, but we're not quite there yet.

## Builder Syntax - Static Methods or Functions?

I've mentioned before that the builder uses static methods because of naming
conflicts. It really comes down to a few names, for example the `$match` stage
and `$and` or `$switch` operators. While PHP allows us to use reserved keywords
as names for methods in a class, they are not allowed for function names. We
have considered using suffixes for namespaced functions:

```php
function andQuery(...) {}
function matchStage(...) {}
function switchOperator(...) {}
```

Adding a suffix to every stage and operator doesn't really reduce verbosity, so
we decided against it. Another option was to use an underscore prefix for all
reserved names:

```php
function _and(...) {}
function _match(...) {}
function _switch(...) {}
```

We also decided against this option, partly because the underscore marks (or at
least used to mark) private functions or methods, but also because the

> underscore would break alphabetical sorting in code completion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also decided against this option, partly because underscores have
historically been used to mark private methods and properties, but also
because the underscore would break alphabetical sorting in code completion.
```

A less-than-serious approach was to use emojis, which I learned was valid in

> PHP:

Reviewer: If you want to be especially evil: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-width_space

```php
function 🔍and(...) {}
function 💲match(...) {}
```

In all seriousness, there are alternatives if you dislike the static methods.
PHP's
[first class callable syntax](https://www.php.net/manual/en/functions.first_class_callable_syntax.php)
allows you to create a closure from an existing method and store it in a
variable to later invoke the closure:

```php
$reportDate = Expression::dateFieldPath('reportDate');
$price = Expression::doubleFieldPath('price');
$fuelType = Expression::fieldPath('fuelType');
$brand = Expression::fieldPath('station.brand');

$group = Stage::group(...);
$year = Expression::year(...);
$month = Expression::month(...);
$min = Accumulator::min(...);
$max = Accumulator::max(...);
$avg = Accumulator::avg(...);
$sum = Accumulator::sum(...);

$group(
    _id: object(
        year: $year($reportDate),
        month: $month($reportDate),
        fuelType: $fuelType,
        brand: $brand,
    ),
    lowest: $min($price),
    highest: $max($price),
    average: $avg($price),
    count: $sum(1),
);
```

> Again, PHP's use of `$` to mark variables plays nice with aggregation pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again, PHP's use of `$` to mark variables plays nice with the aggregation framework
```

This is the second time I noticed you refer to "aggregation pipeline" as you would a proper noun. I think "the" is necessary here as it's a thing and not a formal name.

Also changed to "framework" because I don't consider the pipeline as a logical owner of stages and operators. It's just another component where those get used.

using it for stages and operators. We have considered adding a method to each
factory class that would return an array of closures to make this easier:

```php
['year' => $year, 'month' => $month] = Accumulator::accumulators();

// Alternatively, if you want to use all accumulators as variables:
extract(Accumulator::accumulators());
```

We have not implemented this for now, but if you prefer this syntax to static

> methods, or if you have alternative suggestions, please let us know about them!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have decided not implemented this for now, but if you prefer this syntax to static
methods, or if you have alternative suggestions, please let us know about them!
```

I felt like a word was missing here.
